FOCUS #174: List Cost metric (#235)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/metrics/listcost.md

# List Cost

> The List Cost represents a charge inclusive of the impacts of volume/tier-based rates while excluding any negotiated or commitment-based discounts. This cost is denominated in the [Billing Currency](#billingcurrency). The List Cost equals the [BilledCost](#billedcost) if there are no negotiated or commitment-based discounts against the resource and/or service. By comparing it with [EffectiveCost](#effectivecost) you can calculate savings based on rate optimization activities.

Reviewer: I believe that List Cost should also exclude Spot instances as well, so practitioners could use List price to calculate savings from leveraging spot. 
Suggested change of definition: while excluding negotiated, commitment-based or spare capacity (spot) discounts

Reviewer 2: This seems like a good suggestion @ijurica  happy for me to change it per Yuriys suggestion?

Author: suggestion: 
...while excluding any negotiated, commitment-based discounts or spare capacity (spot) discounts...

Author: To include the capability to calculate savings from utilizing spare capacity (spot) discounts, we are still exploring a couple of alternative List Cost definitions.

- OPTION A (current version): _The List Cost represents a charge inclusive of the impacts of volume/tier-based rates while excluding any negotiated discounts, commitment-based discounts or the amortization of upfront charges (one-time or recurring)._

- OPTION B : _The List Cost represents a charge inclusive of the impacts of volume/tier-based rates while excluding any negotiated discounts, commitment-based discounts, **spare capacity (spot) discounts** or the amortization of upfront charges (one-time or recurring)._

- OPTION C (aligned with pricing model column terminology): _The List Cost represents a charge inclusive of the impacts of volume/tier-based rates while excluding any negotiated discounts, commitment-based discounts, **the impacts of dynamic pricing model** or the amortization of upfront charges (one-time or recurring)._

Note: **Alignment of all unit price and cost metric definitions is implied.**

Reviewer 2: I think Option B looks the most correct. Its very clear and it mentions the exclusion of the amortization of upfront charges which I think is key to exclude for the List Cost.

Reviewer 3: Option B is crystal clear

Reviewer 4: I like Option C over Option B because it is more vendor-neutral.  Removing `(spot)` from Option B would make me more in favor because GCP's name for `spot` is `preemptible`.

Author: Discussed at the meeting and decided to simplify the definition (similar to ListUnitPrice).
Notes regarding included/excluded impacts are provided in the supporting content

> The List Cost represents a charge inclusive of the impacts of volume/tier-based rates while excluding any negotiated discounts, commitment-based discounts or the amortization of upfront charges (one-time or recurring). This cost is denominated in the [Billing Currency](#billingcurrency). The List Cost equals the [Billed Cost](#billedcost) if there are no negotiated or commitment-based discounts against the resource and/or service. It is used to calculate savings based on rate optimization activities, by comparing it with [Effective Cost](#effectivecost).

Author: ```suggestion
The List Cost represents a charge inclusive of the impacts of volume/tier-based rates while excluding any negotiated discounts, commitment-based discounts or the amortization of upfront charges (one-time or recurring). This cost is denominated in the [Billing Currency](#billingcurrency). The List Cost equals the [Billed Cost](#billedcost) if there are no negotiated nor commitment-based discounts against the resource and/or service. It is used to calculate savings based on rate optimization activities, by comparing it with [Effective Cost](#effectivecost).
```

> The List Cost represents a charge inclusive of the impacts of free-tier, volume/tier-based, BYOL-based and dynamically priced SKU rates, while excluding any other discounts or the amortization of upfront charges (one-time or recurring). This cost is denominated in the [Billing Currency](#billingcurrency). It is used for calculating savings based on rate optimization activities, by comparing it with [Effective Cost](#effectivecost). In this context, activities such as increased consumption leading to lower volume/tier-based rates, the use of pre-owned software licenses (BYOL - Bring Your Own License), leveraging interruptible resources and/or services, or optimizing usage to take advantage of dynamic pricing models are not considered rate optimization activities.

Reviewer 5: Trying to avoid generic references like "this" and "it". Also replacing the statement about what's in or not in rate optimization. May want to tweak this based on Udam's ListUnitPrice comments.
```suggestion
The List Cost represents a charge inclusive of the impacts of free-tier, volume/tier-based, BYOL-based and dynamically priced SKU rates, while excluding any other discounts or the amortization of upfront charges (one-time or recurring). List Cost is denominated in the [Billing Currency](#billingcurrency) and is used for calculating savings based on rate optimization activities, by comparing it with [Effective Cost](#effectivecost). List Unit Price cannot be used to calculate savings based on volume/tier-based pricing, the use of pre-owned software licenses (BYOL - Bring Your Own License), leveraging interruptible resources and/or services, or optimizing usage to take advantage of dynamic pricing models.
```

Reviewer 5: I didn't propose a change for this, but just to add a note, I do think the first sentence feels overly complicated. It feels like we can simply say it's the "public, retail price for the SkuPriceId". I'm assuming that's the basis for Udam's simplification.

Reviewer 2: I agree with Michael

Author: - New version of the definition is based on suggested changes.
- The sentence, "_List Unit Price cannot be used to calculate savings based on..._", was relocated to the supporting content and the reference to  'List Unit Price' was replaced with the reference to the 'List Cost'.

> The List Cost represents a charge inclusive of the impacts of free-tier, volume/tier-based, BYOL-based and dynamically priced SKU rates, while excluding any other discounts or the amortization of upfront charges (one-time or recurring). It equals the [Billed Cost](#billedcost) if there are no negotiated nor commitment-based discounts against the resource and/or service. This cost is denominated in the [Billing Currency](#billingcurrency). It is used for calculating savings based on rate optimization activities, by comparing it with [Effective Cost](#effectivecost). In this context, activities such as increased consumption leading to lower volume/tier-based rates, the use of pre-owned software licenses (BYOL - Bring Your Own License), leveraging interruptible resources and/or services, or optimizing usage to take advantage of dynamic pricing models are not considered rate optimization activities.

Author: ```suggestion
The List Cost represents a charge inclusive of the impacts of free-tier, volume/tier-based, BYOL-based and dynamically priced SKU rates, while excluding any other discounts or the amortization of upfront charges (one-time or recurring). This cost is denominated in the [Billing Currency](#billingcurrency). It is used for calculating savings based on rate optimization activities, by comparing it with [Effective Cost](#effectivecost). In this context, activities such as increased consumption leading to lower volume/tier-based rates, the use of pre-owned software licenses (BYOL - Bring Your Own License), leveraging interruptible resources and/or services, or optimizing usage to take advantage of dynamic pricing models are not considered rate optimization activities.
```

> The ListCost column MUST be present in the billing data. This column MUST be a valid numeric value of type Decimal and MUST NOT contain null values. When a [ListUnitPrice](#listunitprice) is not null, multiplying the ListUnitPrice by [QuantityInPricingUnit](#quantityinpricingunit ) MUST produce the ListCost. In cases where the ListUnitPrice is null, the following applies:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The ListCost column MUST be present in the billing data. This column MUST be a valid numeric value of type Decimal and MUST NOT contain null values. When a [ListUnitPrice](#listunitprice) is not null, multiplying the ListUnitPrice by [QuantityInPricingUnit](#quantityinpricingunit) MUST produce the ListCost. In cases where the ListUnitPrice is null, the following applies:
```

> The ListCost column MUST be present in the billing data. This column MUST be a valid numeric value of type Decimal and MUST NOT contain null values. When a [ListUnitPrice](#listunitprice) is not null, multiplying the ListUnitPrice by [QuantityInPricingUnit](#quantityinpricingunit ) MUST produce the ListCost. In cases where the ListUnitPrice is null, the following applies:

Reviewer 5: nit: Can we switch this to use bullets so we don't have a mix of paragraph + bullets? This would be the only place we have that, I believe.

Reviewer 2: @flanakin @ijurica  could we move this down to supporting information: In this context, activities such as increased consumption leading to lower volume/tier-based rates, the use of pre-owned software licenses (BYOL - Bring Your Own License), leveraging interruptible resources and/or services, or optimizing usage to take advantage of dynamic pricing models are not considered rate optimization activities.

Does BYOL-based need to be included in the definition?

Author: - Agree with the suggestion to relocate.
- List of excluded rate optimization based on the reduced rates and discounts mentioned in **Cloud FinOps - Rate optimization chapter** and the **BYOL** is one of them

# List Cost

> List Cost represents the cost calculated based on [List Unit Price](#listunitprice) and the corresponding [Pricing Quantity](#pricingquantity). List cost is denominated in the [Billing Currency](#billingcurrency) and is used for calculating savings based on various rate optimization activities, by comparing it with [Effective Cost](#effectivecost).

Reviewer 6: Is the following calculation true?

> List Cost = List Unit Price * Pricing Quantity

If so, could we be explicit somewhere in this document that A = B * C?  Even a change as simple as the following would do it for me:

```suggestion
List Cost represents the cost calculated by multiplying [List Unit Price](#listunitprice) and the corresponding [Pricing Quantity](#pricingquantity). List cost is denominated in the [Billing Currency](#billingcurrency) and is used for calculating savings based on various rate optimization activities, by comparing it with [Effective Cost](#effectivecost).
```

Based on this specific verbiage, I suspect this was already discussed... but given that it's vague, it leaves me as the layman reader wondering what the precise calc is.

Reviewer 2: Its my understanding this format is consistent across all of the Price * Quantity based Cost Metrics. So if we do change and add this specifically I think it will need to be across the board.

Author: we'll use this as a reference for upcoming unit prices...

> List Cost represents the cost calculated by multiplying [List Unit Price](#listunitprice) and the corresponding [Pricing Quantity](#pricingquantity). List cost is denominated in the [Billing Currency](#billingcurrency) and is used for calculating savings based on various rate optimization activities, by comparing it with [Effective Cost](#effectivecost).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
List Cost represents the cost calculated by multiplying [List Unit Price](#listunitprice) and the corresponding [Pricing Quantity](#pricingquantity). List Cost is denominated in the [Billing Currency](#billingcurrency) and is used for calculating savings based on various rate optimization activities, by comparing it with [Effective Cost](#effectivecost).
```

> The List Cost represents a suggested provider-published cost inclusive of the impacts of free-tier, volume/tier-based, BYOL-based SKU rates, while excluding any other discounts or the amortization of upfront charges (one-time or recurring). List cost is denominated in the [Billing Currency](#billingcurrency) and is used for calculating savings based on various rate optimization activities, by comparing it with [Effective Cost](#effectivecost).

Author: ```suggestion
The List Cost represents a cost based on [List Unit Price](#listunitprice) (a suggested provider-published unit price) that would be charged if that unit price were applied to the respective [Pricing Quantity](#pricingquantity). List cost is denominated in the [Billing Currency](#billingcurrency) and is used for calculating savings based on various rate optimization activities, by comparing it with [Effective Cost](#effectivecost).
```

Author: This further simplified version is based on the level of simplification we opted for in case of ListUnitPrice definition.
@jpickardgreen @flanakin @udam-f2 - I would appreciate your feedback and phrasing suggestions

Author: opted for further simplified version (aligned with ListUnitPrice) and addressed the description as well

> The List Cost represents a suggested provider-published cost inclusive of the impacts of free-tier, volume/tier-based, BYOL-based, and dynamically priced SKU rates, while excluding any other discounts or the amortization of relevant purchases (one-time or recurring) paid to cover future eligible charges. List cost is denominated in the [Billing Currency](#billingcurrency) and is used for calculating savings based on various rate optimization activities, by comparing it with [Effective Cost](#effectivecost).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The List Cost represents the cost calculated based on [List Unit Price](#listunitprice) and the corresponding [Pricing Quantity](#pricingquantity). List cost is denominated in the [Billing Currency](#billingcurrency) and is used for calculating savings based on various rate optimization activities, by comparing it with [Effective Cost](#effectivecost).
```

The ListCost column MUST be present in the billing data. This column MUST be a valid numeric value of type Decimal, denominated in the BillingCurrency, and MUST NOT contain null values. When a ListUnitPrice is not null, multiplying the ListUnitPrice by PricingQuantity MUST produce the ListCost.

In cases where the ListUnitPrice is null, the following applies:

> 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```

> The ListCost column MUST be present in the billing data. This column MUST be a valid numeric value of type Decimal, denominated in the BillingCurrency,and MUST NOT contain null values. When a [ListUnitPrice](#listunitprice) is not null, multiplying the ListUnitPrice by [PricingQuantity](#pricingquantity) MUST produce the ListCost.

Author: ```suggestion
The ListCost column MUST be present in the billing data. This column MUST be a valid numeric value of type Decimal, denominated in the BillingCurrency, and MUST NOT contain null values. When a [ListUnitPrice](#listunitprice) is not null, multiplying the ListUnitPrice by [PricingQuantity](#pricingquantity) MUST produce the ListCost.
```

> * If the charge is calculated based on other charges (e.g. [ChargeCategory](#chargecategory) is 'Tax'), the ListCost MUST be calculated based on the ListCost of the related charges.

Reviewer 6: @udam-f2 Is there guidance around putting conditional statements at the beginning vs end of normative statements?  If not, could I propose that normative statements always start with a MUST, SHOULD, etc, with modifiers to follow?  Something like:

```suggestion
* The ListCost MUST be calculated based on the ListCost of the related charges if the charge is calculated based on other charges (e.g. [ChargeCategory](#chargecategory) is 'Tax').
```

If not, perhaps the opposite, where conditional statements are always up top?  If so, this section is fine, but other specs would need a scrub.

Author: performed updates based on suggestion

> * The ListCost MUST match the BilledCost if the charge is unrelated to other charges (e.g. [AdjustmentType](#adjustmenttype) is 'Credit').

Reviewer 8: I am not clear what this means.
I believe the ListCost would be the same as the BilledCost only in case there is no discount.

Author: You calculate rate optimization savings by comparing ListCost and EffectiveCost and in case of ad-hoc credits we expect both of those costs to be identical to the BilledCost.

> In cases where the ListUnitPrice is null, the following applies:
> 
> * If the line item is based on other charges (e.g. [ChargeCategory](#chargecategory) is 'Tax'), the ListCost MUST be calculated based on ListCost of the related charges
> * If the line item is unrelated to other charges (e.g. [ChargeSubcategory](#chargesubcategory) is 'Credit'), the ListCost MUST match the BilledCost.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
In cases where the ListUnitPrice is null, the following applies:
* If the charge is calculated based on other charges, the ListCost MUST be calculated based on the ListCost of the related charges (e.g. ListCost for [ChargeCategory](#chargecategory) 'Tax' should be calculated based on ListCost of the charges 'Tax' is calculated for).
* If the charge is unrelated to other charges (e.g. [ChargeSubcategory](#chargesubcategory) is 'Credit'), the ListCost MUST match the BilledCost.
```

## Column ID

ListCost

## Display name

List Cost

## Description

> A suggested provider-published cost inclusive of the impacts of free-tier, volume/tier-based, BYOL-based, and dynamically priced SKU rates, while excluding any other discounts or the amortization of relevant purchases (one-time or recurring) paid to cover future eligible charges.

Author: ```suggestion
Cost calculated based on [List Unit Price](#listunitprice) and the corresponding [Pricing Quantity](#pricingquantity).
```

> A suggested provider-published cost inclusive of the impacts of free-tier, volume/tier-based, BYOL-based, and dynamically priced SKU rates, while excluding any other discounts or the amortization of relevant purchases (one-time or recurring) paid to cover future eligible charges.

Reviewer 7: the cost calculated based on [List Unit Price](#listunitprice) and the corresponding [Pricing Quantity](#pricingquantity).
